As Introduced
135th General Assembly
Regular Session S. B. No. 63
2023-2024
Senator Lang
Cosponsors: Senators Cirino, Hackett, Huffman, S., Romanchuk, Schaffer,
Schuring, Wilson, Rulli, Reynolds, Reineke
A B I L L
To enact section 2307.931 of the Revised Code to
require a plaintiff in a tort action alleging an
asbestos claim to file specified disclosures.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF OHIO:
Section 1. That section 2307.931 of the Revised Code be
enacted to read as follows:
Sec. 2307.931. (A) As used in this section, "each
exposure" means every exposure to asbestos or an asbestos-
containing product by an exposed person or by a person through
whom the exposed person was exposed to asbestos.
(B) The plaintiff in any tort action who alleges an
asbestos claim shall file, within thirty days after filing any
complaint, a sworn statement signed by the plaintiff or the
plaintiff's counsel, specifying the evidence that provides the
basis for each asbestos claim against each defendant in the
action. The sworn statement is in addition to any other
requirements for asbestos claims under sections 2307.91 to
2307.98 of the Revised Code and shall include all of the
following with specificity:
(1) The name, address, date of birth, marital status,
occupation, smoking history, current and past worksites, and
current and past employers of the exposed person and any person
through whom the exposed person was exposed to asbestos;
(2) The name, address, and relationship to the exposed
person of each person who is knowledgeable regarding the exposed
person's exposures to asbestos;
(3) The manufacturer and seller and the specific name of
each asbestos-containing product, including, but not limited to,
all brand and trade names of that specific asbestos-containing
product, to which the exposed person was exposed or to which the
other person was exposed if the exposure was through another
person;
(4) For each exposure to an asbestos-containing product
identified under division (B)(3) of this section, each site and
the specific location at each site, including the address of
each site, where the exposed person was exposed or where the
other person was exposed if the exposure was through another
person;
(5) The beginning and ending dates of each exposure, the
specific manner of each exposure, the frequency and length of
each exposure, and the proximity of the asbestos-containing
product or its use to the exposed person and to each person
through whom the exposed person alleges exposure to asbestos;
(6) The specific asbestos-related disease that is alleged;
(7) Any supporting documentation relating to the
information required under division (B) of this section.
(C) A plaintiff in a tort action alleging an asbestos
claim has a continuing duty to supplement the information that
is required to be disclosed under division (B) of this section,
including when the plaintiff receives new exposure history
information or becomes aware that a prior disclosure was
inaccurate or incomplete.
(D) The plaintiff shall not commence discovery against a
defendant in a tort action alleging an asbestos claim until the
defendant's product or premises is specifically identified in
the disclosures required under division (B) of this section.
(E)(1) A defendant whose product or premises is not
specifically identified in the disclosures required under
division (B) of this section, or who believes the plaintiff's
disclosures fail to comply with division (B) of this section,
may file a motion with the court to administratively dismiss the
plaintiff's claim against that defendant. The plaintiff shall
have thirty days from the date of the filing of the defendant's
motion to file disclosures that comply with division (B) of this
section or otherwise respond to the defendant's motion.
(2) The court shall administratively dismiss a plaintiff's
asbestos claim against a defendant who files a motion under
division (E)(1) of this section or as to all defendants, as
applicable, if the plaintiff's disclosures fail to comply with
division (B) of this section.
(F) A claim that is administratively dismissed pursuant to
division (E) of this section is dismissed other than upon the
merits for purposes of section 2305.19 of the Revised Code.
(G) This section applies to a tort action alleging an
asbestos claim that is filed on or after the effective date of
(H) This section does not apply to a claim for workers'
compensation or a claim for veterans' benefits.