As Introduced
135th General Assembly
Regular Session H. B. No. 60
2023-2024
Representative Troy
Cosponsors: Representatives Humphrey, Dell'Aquila, Miranda, Brent, Weinstein,
Forhan, McNally, Miller, A., Brennan, Sweeney, Russo, Skindell, Lightbody, Baker,
Upchurch
A B I L L
To amend sections 323.152 and 4503.065 of the
Revised Code to increase the amount of and
expand the income qualifications for the
homestead exemption.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF OHIO:
Section 1. That sections 323.152 and 4503.065 of the
Revised Code be amended to read as follows:
Sec. 323.152. In addition to the reduction in taxes
required under section 319.302 of the Revised Code, taxes shall
be reduced as provided in divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
(A)(1)(a) Division (A)(1) of this section applies to any
of the following persons:
(i) A person who is permanently and totally disabled;
(ii) A person who is sixty-five years of age or older;
(iii) A person who is the surviving spouse of a deceased
person who was permanently and totally disabled or sixty-five
years of age or older and who applied and qualified for a
reduction in taxes under this division in the year of death,
provided the surviving spouse is at least fifty-nine but not
sixty-five or more years of age on the date the deceased spouse
dies.
(b) Real property taxes on a homestead owned and occupied,
or a homestead in a housing cooperative occupied, by a person to
whom division (A)(1) of this section applies shall be reduced
for each year for which an application for the reduction has
been approved. The reduction shall equal one of the following
amounts, as applicable to the person:
(i) If the person received a reduction under division (A)
(1) of this section for tax year 2006, the greater of the
reduction for that tax year or the amount computed under
division (A)(1)(c) of this section;
(ii) If the person received, for any homestead, a
reduction under division (A)(1) of this section for tax year
2013 or under division (A) of section 4503.065 of the Revised
Code for tax year 2014 or the person is the surviving spouse of
such a person and the surviving spouse is at least fifty-nine
years of age on the date the deceased spouse dies, the amount
computed under division (A)(1)(c) of this section. For purposes
of divisions (A)(1)(b)(ii) and (iii) of this section, a person
receives a reduction under division (A)(1) of this section or
under division (A) of section 4503.065 of the Revised Code for
tax year 2013 or 2014, respectively, if the person files a late
application for that respective tax year that is approved by the
county auditor under section 323.153 or 4503.066 of the Revised
Code.
(iii) If the person is not described in division (A)(1)(b)
(i) or (ii) of this section and the person's total income does
not exceed thirty forty-five thousand dollars, as adjusted under
division (A)(1)(d) of this section, the amount computed under
division (A)(1)(c) of this section.
(c) The amount of the reduction under division (A)(1)(c)
of this section equals the product of the following:
(i) Twenty-five thousand Forty thousand dollars of the
true value of the property in money, as adjusted under division
(A)(1)(d) of this section;
(ii) The assessment percentage established by the tax
commissioner under division (B) of section 5715.01 of the
Revised Code, not to exceed thirty-five per cent;
(iii) The effective tax rate used to calculate the taxes
charged against the property for the current year, where
"effective tax rate" is defined as in section 323.08 of the
Revised Code;
(iv) The quantity equal to one minus the sum of the
percentage reductions in taxes received by the property for the
current tax year under section 319.302 of the Revised Code and
division (B) of section 323.152 of the Revised Code.
(d) Each calendar year, the tax commissioner shall adjust
the total income threshold described in division (A)(1)(b)(iii)
and the reduction amount described in division (A)(1)(c)(i) of
this section by completing the following calculations in
September of each year:
(i) Determine the percentage increase in the gross
domestic product deflator determined by the bureau of economic
analysis of the United States department of commerce from the
first day of January of the preceding calendar year to the last
day of December of the preceding calendar year;
(ii) Multiply that percentage increase by the total income
threshold or reduction amount for the current tax year, as
applicable;
(iii) Add the resulting product to the total income
threshold or the reduction amount, as applicable, for the
current tax year;
(iv) Round the resulting sum to the nearest multiple of
one hundred dollars.
The commissioner shall certify the amount resulting from
the each adjustment to each county auditor not later than the
first day of December each year. The certified total income
threshold amount applies to the following tax year for persons
described in division (A)(1)(b)(iii) of this section. The
certified reduction amount applies to the following tax year.
The commissioner shall not make the applicable adjustment in any
calendar year in which the amount resulting from the adjustment
would be less than the total income threshold or the reduction
amount for the current tax year.
(2) Real property taxes on a homestead owned and occupied,
or a homestead in a housing cooperative occupied, by a disabled
veteran shall be reduced for each year for which an application
for the reduction has been approved. The reduction shall equal
the product obtained by multiplying fifty thousand dollars of
the true value of the property in money by the amounts described
in divisions (A)(1)(c)(ii) to (iv) of this section. The
reduction is in lieu of any reduction under section 323.158 of
the Revised Code or division (A)(1) or (3) of this section. The
reduction applies to only one homestead owned and occupied by a
disabled veteran.
If a homestead qualifies for a reduction in taxes under
division (A)(2) of this section for the year in which the
disabled veteran dies, and the disabled veteran is survived by a
spouse who occupied the homestead when the disabled veteran died
and who acquires ownership of the homestead or, in the case of a
homestead that is a unit in a housing cooperative, continues to
occupy the homestead, the reduction shall continue through the
year in which the surviving spouse dies or remarries.
(3) Real property taxes on a homestead owned and occupied,
or a homestead in a housing cooperative occupied, by the
surviving spouse of a public service officer killed in the line
of duty shall be reduced for each year for which an application
for the reduction has been approved. The reduction shall equal
the product obtained by multiplying fifty thousand dollars of
the true value of the property in money by the amounts described
in divisions (A)(1)(c)(ii) to (iv) of this section. The
reduction is in lieu of any reduction under section 323.158 of
the Revised Code or division (A)(1) or (2) of this section. The
reduction applies to only one homestead owned and occupied by
such a surviving spouse. A homestead qualifies for a reduction
in taxes under division (A)(3) of this section for the tax year
in which the public service officer dies through the tax year in
which the surviving spouse dies or remarries.
(B) To provide a partial exemption, real property taxes on
any homestead, and manufactured home taxes on any manufactured
or mobile home on which a manufactured home tax is assessed
pursuant to division (D)(2) of section 4503.06 of the Revised
Code, shall be reduced for each year for which an application
for the reduction has been approved. The amount of the reduction
shall equal two and one-half per cent of the amount of taxes to
be levied by qualifying levies on the homestead or the
manufactured or mobile home after applying section 319.301 of
the Revised Code. For the purposes of this division, "qualifying
levy" has the same meaning as in section 319.302 of the Revised
Code.
(C) The reductions granted by this section do not apply to
special assessments or respread of assessments levied against
the homestead, and if there is a transfer of ownership
subsequent to the filing of an application for a reduction in
taxes, such reductions are not forfeited for such year by virtue
of such transfer.
(D) The reductions in taxable value referred to in this
section shall be applied solely as a factor for the purpose of
computing the reduction of taxes under this section and shall
not affect the total value of property in any subdivision or
taxing district as listed and assessed for taxation on the tax
lists and duplicates, or any direct or indirect limitations on
indebtedness of a subdivision or taxing district. If after
application of sections 5705.31 and 5705.32 of the Revised Code,
including the allocation of all levies within the ten-mill
limitation to debt charges to the extent therein provided, there
would be insufficient funds for payment of debt charges not
provided for by levies in excess of the ten-mill limitation, the
reduction of taxes provided for in sections 323.151 to 323.159
of the Revised Code shall be proportionately adjusted to the
extent necessary to provide such funds from levies within the
ten-mill limitation.
(E) No reduction shall be made on the taxes due on the
homestead of any person convicted of violating division (D) or
(E) of section 323.153 of the Revised Code for a period of three
years following the conviction.
Sec. 4503.065. (A)(1) Division (A) of this section applies
to any of the following persons:
(a) An individual who is permanently and totally disabled;
(b) An individual who is sixty-five years of age or older;
(c) An individual who is the surviving spouse of a
deceased person who was permanently and totally disabled or
sixty-five years of age or older and who applied and qualified
for a reduction in assessable value under this section in the
year of death, provided the surviving spouse is at least fifty-
nine but not sixty-five or more years of age on the date the
deceased spouse dies.
(2) The manufactured home tax on a manufactured or mobile
home that is paid pursuant to division (C) of section 4503.06 of
the Revised Code and that is owned and occupied as a home by an
individual whose domicile is in this state and to whom this
section applies, shall be reduced for any tax year for which an
application for such reduction has been approved, provided the
individual did not acquire ownership from a person, other than
the individual's spouse, related by consanguinity or affinity
for the purpose of qualifying for the reduction. An owner
includes a settlor of a revocable or irrevocable inter vivos
trust holding the title to a manufactured or mobile home
occupied by the settlor as of right under the trust.
(a) For manufactured and mobile homes for which the tax
imposed by section 4503.06 of the Revised Code is computed under
division (D)(2) of that section, the reduction shall equal one
of the following amounts, as applicable to the person:
(i) If the person received a reduction under this section
for tax year 2007, the greater of the reduction for that tax
year or the amount computed under division (A)(2)(b) of this
section;
(ii) If the person received, for any homestead, a
reduction under division (A) of this section for tax year 2014
or under division (A)(1) of section 323.152 of the Revised Code
for tax year 2013 or the person is the surviving spouse of such
a person and the surviving spouse is at least fifty-nine years
of age on the date the deceased spouse dies, the amount computed
under division (A)(2)(b) of this section. For purposes of
divisions (A)(2)(a)(ii) and (iii) of this section, a person
receives a reduction under division (A) of this section or
division (A)(1) of section 323.152 of the Revised Code for tax
year 2014 or 2013, respectively, if the person files a late
application for that respective tax year that is approved by the
county auditor under section 4503.066 or 323.153 of the Revised
Code.
(iii) If the person is not described in division (A)(2)(a)
(i) or (ii) of this section and the person's total income does
not exceed thirty forty-five thousand dollars, as adjusted under
division (A)(2)(e) of this section, the amount computed under
division (A)(2)(b) of this section.
(b) The amount of the reduction under division (A)(2)(b)
of this section equals the product of the following:
(i) Twenty-five Forty thousand dollars of the true value
of the property in money, as adjusted under division (A)(2)(e)
of this section;
(ii) The assessment percentage established by the tax
commissioner under division (B) of section 5715.01 of the
Revised Code, not to exceed thirty-five per cent;
(iii) The effective tax rate used to calculate the taxes
charged against the property for the current year, where
"effective tax rate" is defined as in section 323.08 of the
Revised Code;
(iv) The quantity equal to one minus the sum of the
percentage reductions in taxes received by the property for the
current tax year under section 319.302 of the Revised Code and
division (B) of section 323.152 of the Revised Code.
(c) For manufactured and mobile homes for which the tax
imposed by section 4503.06 of the Revised Code is computed under
division (D)(1) of that section, the reduction shall equal one
of the following amounts, as applicable to the person:
(i) If the person received a reduction under this section
for tax year 2007, the greater of the reduction for that tax
year or the amount computed under division (A)(2)(d) of this
section;
(ii) If the person received, for any homestead, a
reduction under division (A) of this section for tax year 2014
or under division (A)(1) of section 323.152 of the Revised Code
for tax year 2013 or the person is the surviving spouse of such
a person and the surviving spouse is at least fifty-nine years
of age on the date the deceased spouse dies, the amount computed
under division (A)(2)(d) of this section. For purposes of
divisions (A)(2)(c)(ii) and (iii) of this section, a person
receives a reduction under division (A) of this section or under
division (A)(1) of section 323.152 of the Revised Code for tax
year 2014 or 2013, respectively, if the person files a late
application for a refund of overpayments for that respective tax
year that is approved by the county auditor under section
4503.066 of the Revised Code.
(iii) If the person is not described in division (A)(2)(c)
(i) or (ii) of this section and the person's total income does
not exceed thirty forty-five thousand dollars, as adjusted under
division (A)(2)(e) of this section, the amount computed under
division (A)(2)(d) of this section.
(d) The amount of the reduction under division (A)(2)(d)
of this section equals the product of the following:
(i) Twenty-five Forty thousand dollars of the cost to the
owner, or the market value at the time of purchase, whichever is
greater, as those terms are used in division (D)(1) of section
4503.06 of the Revised Code, and as adjusted under division (A)
(2)(e) of this section;
(ii) The percentage from the appropriate schedule in
division (D)(1)(b) of section 4503.06 of the Revised Code;
(iii) The assessment percentage of forty per cent used in
division (D)(1)(b) of section 4503.06 of the Revised Code;
(iv) The tax rate of the taxing district in which the home
has its situs.
(e) Each calendar year, the tax commissioner shall adjust
the income threshold described in divisions (A)(2)(a)(iii) and
(A)(2)(c)(iii) and the reduction amount described in divisions
(A)(2)(b)(i) and (A)(2)(d)(i) of this section by completing the
following calculations in September of each year:
(i) Determine the percentage increase in the gross
domestic product deflator determined by the bureau of economic
analysis of the United States department of commerce from the
first day of January of the preceding calendar year to the last
day of December of the preceding calendar year;
(ii) Multiply that percentage increase by the total income
threshold or reduction amount for the ensuing tax year, as
applicable;
(iii) Add the resulting product to the total income
threshold or reduction amount, as applicable for the ensuing tax
year;
(iv) Round the resulting sum to the nearest multiple of
one hundred dollars.
The commissioner shall certify the amount resulting from
the each adjustment to each county auditor not later than the
first day of December each year. The certified amount applies to
the second ensuing tax year. The commissioner shall not make the
applicable adjustment in any calendar year in which the amount
resulting from the adjustment would be less than the total
income threshold or the reduction amount for the ensuing tax
year.
(B) The manufactured home tax levied pursuant to division
(C) of section 4503.06 of the Revised Code on a manufactured or
mobile home that is owned and occupied by a disabled veteran
shall be reduced for any tax year for which an application for
such reduction has been approved, provided the disabled veteran
did not acquire ownership from a person, other than the disabled
veteran's spouse, related by consanguinity or affinity for the
purpose of qualifying for the reduction. An owner includes an
owner within the meaning of division (A)(2) of this section.
(1) For manufactured and mobile homes for which the tax
imposed by section 4503.06 of the Revised Code is computed under
division (D)(2) of that section, the reduction shall equal the
product obtained by multiplying fifty thousand dollars of the
true value of the property in money by the amounts described in
divisions (A)(2)(b)(ii) to (iv) of this section.
(2) For manufactured and mobile homes for which the tax
imposed by section 4503.06 of the Revised Code is computed under
division (D)(1) of that section, the reduction shall equal the
product obtained by multiplying fifty thousand dollars of the
cost to the owner, or the market value at the time of purchase,
whichever is greater, as those terms are used in division (D)(1)
of section 4503.06 of the Revised Code, by the amounts described
in divisions (A)(2)(d)(ii) to (iv) of this section.
The reduction is in lieu of any reduction under section
4503.0610 of the Revised Code or division (A) or (C) of this
section. The reduction applies to only one manufactured or
mobile home owned and occupied by a disabled veteran.
If a manufactured or mobile home qualifies for a reduction
in taxes under this division for the year in which the disabled
veteran dies, and the disabled veteran is survived by a spouse
who occupied the home when the disabled veteran died and who
acquires ownership of the home, the reduction shall continue
through the year in which the surviving spouse dies or
remarries.
(C) The manufactured home tax levied pursuant to division
(C) of section 4503.06 of the Revised Code on a manufactured or
mobile home that is owned and occupied by the surviving spouse
of a public service officer killed in the line of duty shall be
reduced for any tax year for which an application for such
reduction has been approved, provided the surviving spouse did
not acquire ownership from a person, other than the surviving
spouse's deceased public service officer spouse, related by
consanguinity or affinity for the purpose of qualifying for the
reduction. An owner includes an owner within the meaning of
division (A)(2) of this section.
(1) For manufactured and mobile homes for which the tax
imposed by section 4503.06 of the Revised Code is computed under
division (D)(2) of that section, the reduction shall equal the
product obtained by multiplying fifty thousand dollars of the
true value of the property in money by the amounts described in
divisions (A)(2)(b)(ii) to (iv) of this section.
(2) For manufactured and mobile homes for which the tax
imposed by section 4503.06 of the Revised Code is computed under
division (D)(1) of that section, the reduction shall equal the
product obtained by multiplying fifty thousand dollars of the
cost to the owner, or the market value at the time of purchase,
whichever is greater, as those terms are used in division (D)(1)
of section 4503.06 of the Revised Code, by the amounts described
in divisions (A)(2)(d)(ii) to (iv) of this section.
The reduction is in lieu of any reduction under section
4503.0610 of the Revised Code or division (A) or (B) of this
section. The reduction applies to only one manufactured or
mobile home owned and occupied by such a surviving spouse. A
manufactured or mobile home qualifies for a reduction in taxes
under this division for the tax year in which the public service
officer dies through the tax year in which the surviving spouse
dies or remarries.
(D) If the owner or the spouse of the owner of a
manufactured or mobile home is eligible for a homestead
exemption on the land upon which the home is located, the
reduction to which the owner or spouse is entitled under this
section shall not exceed the difference between the reduction to
which the owner or spouse is entitled under division (A), (B),
or (C) of this section and the amount of the reduction under the
homestead exemption.
(E) No reduction shall be made with respect to the home of
any person convicted of violating division (C) or (D) of section
4503.066 of the Revised Code for a period of three years
following the conviction.
Section 2. That existing sections 323.152 and 4503.065 of
the Revised Code are hereby repealed.
Section 3. The amendment by this act of section 323.152 of
the Revised Code applies to tax year 2023 and every tax year
thereafter. The amendment by this act of section 4503.065 of the
Revised Code applies to tax year 2024 and every tax year
thereafter.